Marmaduke Knox Thornton, born in Helen,
Arkansas, February the 8th, 1892. And could you
give us a brief biographical statement of your
early experiences in education, your boyhood? We
moved to Marlin, Texas in 1893,
and for the next seven years I was As soon as I was
able to understand, my mother taught me the same
courses that the children were having. And when
seven years old, I was ready for fifth grade. But we
had moved to Mississippi at that time, and they
wouldn't acknowledge that and put me in the
fourth. Now, that's pretty well that part of it. Is
there anything you want to amplify on that? Oh, if
you could describe the school in Mississippi that
you were put into, was it a one-room school, a
larger? No, it was,
they were beginning at that time to more or less
consolidate the various activities, and I went to
what we call the greenhouse, which had Grades
from, as I recall, from the third up to the eighth.
We had no grades above the eighth at that time. What
town was this in? Starkville, Mississippi.
Starkville? Yeah. I guess pretty much that takes
care of that. I entered fourth grade in 1890. Nine,
seven years old. And you went all the way through
the eighth grade there? I went through the eighth
grade and headed into the ninth grade, which they
established the year when I finished. The eighth
grade, they established the ninth grade. But I had
an accident and had to drop out of school. So...
What did you do after that? I wrote to schools where
I'd give them assistantship or something, help
pay my way. at the same time studying for a doctor.
The only folks that answered my letter was this
one. And I took this job, but they didn't have any
pre-med courses at that time. When did you, and
what year did you come to Texas? I got off the train
at College Station, Texas at 12.15.
February the 15th, 1911, and went on the payroll
February the 16th, 1911. And you were doing what?
Instructor in chemistry and chemical
engineering. My goodness, from education to
chemical engineering, that's quite a switch,
isn't it? Well, you see, I
worked as a chemist for the blast furnaces. during
the two years that I was out, so I didn't come in from
law. You had good practical experience then. Yes,
and another thing, there are courses that today
they take in high school
that were just on the horizon when I came here. What
we call the electrolytic dissociation theory,
and it is every boy in a 10th grade in high school,
knows what that's all about, was only about five or
six years old in Germany, and we were just now
beginning to pick it up. So that and many other
things, chemistry since 1910 has been
revolutionized, and it's revolutionized about
every 10 years. There is no science that I can dream
of that has had as much improvement and change and
development as the chemistry. It's astounding.
Yes, Dr. Lindsay said basically the same thing
when I talked to you. What were your first
impressions when you came to school here? What was
the campus like? What were the students like? Oh,
Lord.
You want the raw details? Sure, just want you to
remember. Excuse me just a second. I got off the
train at 12.15 on the 15th of February, 1911. I
asked the station man where I could get something
to eat. He says, you can't get anything to eat here,
but you can go over to Boyd's store, which is right
across the railroad track at that time, and he gets
you some crackers and cheese. I said, well, that
ain't going to get by. I said, do you mind if I leave
my suitcase and trunk here till I go up? I said, if
what you say is true, I'm going to be on that 3
o'clock train headed east. I said, where is the
college? He said, right up the way there, you just
follow that road there. I said, what's that fence
for? He said, to keep the boys in. I said, hold
everything. Am I at a college or at a penitentiary?
He said, this is a college. I said, what's the idea
of keeping the boys in? Well, they don't want them
running around. I said, uh-huh. I still want you to
keep these until I catch this train. So I started
out. The thing that struck me as I came in, not only
was there a fence, but there was a cedar grove on
each side of the road. It's a beauty. It really was a
beautiful grove on both sides. And I got in the
middle of that road there, I could see the old main
building. And that was all. And the flagpole. And
that was all. But as I went into the campus,
I saw two things. A big drill field and, gosh, all
this bunch of tents in the world. And I couldn't
figure out what sort of a place this was.
It housed the students in tents. I had just come
from school. school that housed all the boys in
dormitories.
But I followed the instructions and turned to the
left. Nice little house over there, across from
where all these tents were. I later learned that's
where a fellow by the name of Kyle lived.
Then there was another little house, a nice little
cottage, and I learned later that's where Dr.
Fountain lived. head of English department. The
next house I saw was Dr. Ellinger's house, I
learned later. Then there was a big building
there, sitting back from the street. And boys were
coming out of that building, picking their teeth.
Well, I wasn't putting that going into the
dormitory, into that mess hall and get something
to eat. I was going to get something to eat. the
instructor's aide. The next house I ran into was a
nice little house, very imposing. I learned later
it was the president's home.
And Andy Godwin across from the president's home,
there was some construction work going up. It
later wound up to be Milner Hall. And another one
there, there was some construction work going on
later that became Leggett Hall. Well, I turned to
the left there in following directions and ran
into Emil Lehmann, a schoolmate in Mississippi.
And he informed me, he's glad to see me, and
informed me that they was looking for me. Well, the
thing that struck me was if they was looking for me,
they were a long way from the depot where I got off.
I told him what I wanted. He sort of got a little
serious. He said, I don't know whether Miss Still
will feed you or not. I said, it don't make any
difference, Emil. She either feeds me, or I'm on
that train going back to Birmingham this
afternoon.
Well, he went back with me.
And opened the double door in the old Shirley, and
Mrs. Still come barging out of the kitchen,
sweating and steaming, on the right he had to open
the door, and I told her I wanted something to eat.
Well, the dinner was over, and she didn't feed
tranchants anyhow. I said, I'm not supposed to be a
tranchant here. Well, I said, maybe. I said, I want
something to eat. Well, Emil talked her into
feeding me.
And after dinner, he took me and lead and showed me
where the chemistry department was and left me. He
was in a new building called, now known as the Nagel
Hall, or the Civil Engineering Building.
I went on in. There was a great big man sitting at a
desk on the second floor. At that time, nobody on
the first floor. The whistle hadn't blown.
I walked in, introduced myself, and he's in a big
roaring voice, a very melodious voice. I learned
to love it. But it could very easily scare the fool
out of us. a recalcitrant student, and he said, I'm
J.C. Blake. I'm glad you're here. Well, I said to
him, Doc, I just want to know if it's all right with
you if I just cancel out my agreement with you and I
catch that train and leave here. I said, I don't
like anything I've seen about this place up to the
present time.
Blake took off, fed me a bunch of hogwash. And I
learned when another man showed up here who went
through the same experience, he gave him the same
bunch of hogwash.
But he convinced me that if I didn't stay,
the school would fold up. And it was up to me to stay
there and make the school a success. And so I agreed
with him that I'd stay till the 1st of June.
He said, good. I noticed that Mr. Nelson has just
come in. Mr. Nelson will show you your duties.
Nelson was glad to see me. He was the bottom man on
the totem pole, and when I came in, I became the
bottom man on the totem pole. Now, what Nelson is
this? W.P. Nelson. Nelson was an instructor in the
chemistry department at that time. He left here
during the war, the First World War.
Well, Nelson took me in tow. He says, you're going
to be responsible for the stock room. that wasn't
part of my agreement but it's okay he said in
addition to that you'll have charge of the
laboratories for freshmen for first year
students and they'll be in these three
dormitories and you'll assist dr frapps a man who
taught organic chemistry in his laboratory right
there
and You'll assist me. I'll be downstairs. I said,
no, I won't either. Well, I got to have some help. I
said, you don't need me. Well, I got the keys to the
stock room. He said, now we'll go to the basement,
and I'll show you what you do down there.
And he showed me a machine, a gas machine that made
artificial gas for burners out of gasoline. Well,
I was familiar with that. We had one in Bessemer
before we left, and I learned something about it.
But I looked at that machine, and I said, Nelson,
how many burners you going to drag on that? He said
75. I said, what's the size of that machine? He said
25. And he said, it gives us lots of trouble. I said,
I can imagine. I said, okay. What else I want to do?
He showed me a bunch of bottles.
And he said, these lost their labels, and you can
test them, and if we find out what they are, we'll
put a label on them and put them back in stock, and
you can test them. Well, I saw a bottle about, a
gallon bottle, I was going to say yea high, that's
what it was, but a gallon bottle, and I looked at it,
I said, what's in that? He said, here's some stuff
that the veterinary department left up there and I
don't know. I said, well, let's find out. I took the
top off and opened it up and it was a concentrated
extract of pool cat ammunition.
Well, I was glad to get that because I said, I'm
going to find out what makes that stuff function.
Well, I didn't. Later on, some student found it. He
put it to some very
uncomfortable usage. But I was going to analyze
it. I was perfectly sure I could. Today, I'm not so
sure. But I went back upstairs then. I said, OK. I
said, you go on upstairs. I'll take over. The first
thing I did is I desensitized that gas machine.
Any fire inspector that had come by would have
locked the thing up and stuck me in the clink. But we
got gas that afternoon for 75 burners. As soon as
the boys at 4 o'clock left, I went back and put the
machine working like it ought to. And I don't think
anyone ever found out just what I was doing to that
bloody machine to make it work. But it worked
there. But that was my... Then I went up and I found
out that the boys wanted evaporating dishes. They
signed for an evaporating dish on a little blue
slip or beaker or anything else. After a while, Dr.
Blake came in, asked me how I was getting along. I
said, I don't know. I said, you don't have much
stock. He said, no, we don't have much stock. He
said, we got $1,500 to run this department on. And
it takes every cent of it, and we can't buy much
goods. He said, it just takes every cent we can dig
up to operate the department. Now, that, of
course, does not include salaries. That was
operating cost. But these boys were saying, I
said, do these boys pay for that material, the
stuff that they break? No, he said, we never billed
them. I said, well, is it all right if I bill them? He
said, well, they've never done it. But we'll try
it. So the first of the month, after checking in and
checking out and working back, I sent a bill
through for them. But that comes later. That
wasn't the first day. Now, if I had taken one of
these striped kitties and tossed it on the dance
floor, I couldn't have caused any more
consternation than the idea of the chemistry
department charging these birds for stuff they
broke. Well, 5 o'clock, I decided I'd go down and
get my stuff and send it up to the Shirley Annex.
Now, that was a building just adjoining the
Shirley where we ate. The Shirley proper had some
rooms upstairs.
The Shirley Annex had a bunch of new rooms. I was
trying to figure it. Let's see, I can figure it
pretty easily. It's 4 times 2 is 8 times 3 is 32
rooms. that single instructors and teachers were
profs. And across the road from it was a yellow
house that the elite among the instructors and so
on lived in.
If you didn't hold your girl just in a certain way
when you danced with her, you couldn't get in that
other building. except for the fact that Charles
Perea, the dean of the college, lived over there
and had two rooms. And, of course, he was one of the
elite. Is this kind of a social clique over there,
rather than elite? Well, we didn't have any
cliques in those days. Of course, it don't make any
difference where you go. In a few days, their group
began to segregate. It's not a clique in one sense
of the word, in another sense of the word, it would
be. These were, though, over in the yellow house,
were those that held their heads just a little
higher than the rest of us. Do you remember what
kind of rent you had to pay in the Shirley Handels?
No, I don't. I think it's probably, probably,
$15 to $20 a month. Did that include meals? Yes, it
did include meals. It may have been a little more
than that. It wasn't a whole lot. By our standards
today, it was not, but according to our standards
back there, it was pretty good because there's a
little difference in pay scales then and here. If
I'm not prying too much, can I ask you how much you
came to A&M for? I came to A&M for the munificent sum
of $600 a year. My goodness. But the president of
the institution only drew $3,600. Dean Pereira
drew $3,000. So $600 a year was quite a livable sum
then. You could live on it, sure. We didn't own
automobiles in those days. Did you take a cut in pay
from? Yeah, I took a cut in pay, but not much. Five
dollars a month. Five dollars a month. a week maybe
or maybe more. I just got tired of looking at the
moon.
See I was working on the night shift and the night
shift consisted in those days of going to work at
six o'clock and working until seven the next
morning. It was a long time. But I went down and took
off in the whistle blue. I went down to the depot to
get my suitcase and arrange my trunk. Emil Neyman
and another fellow in the physics department by
the name of Leon Scala
I said, Leon, that's one of the Skeeler boys, but
Frank Skeeler was an instructor in physics, and he
and Emil had gone down to the depot and got my trunk
and suitcase and had it hauled and put in their room
because there were no empty rooms, and there were
three of us lived in that room the rest of the year.
Emil, I mean, Frank and Emil slept in the double
bed, and I had a single bed. Very cozy arrangement.
It's kind of crowded. Yes, but we weren't
accustomed to much.
At supper I met all the rest of the fellas. Some of
them I consider top hands in anybody's works. I
learned to love them. The others I learned to
tolerate. Now that's my first day. That was quite a
full day, wasn't it?
Oh, my. Well, can you tell us a little bit about your
career at A&M, going from the first day and what
courses you might have taught? Well, the first
year I was here, I ran the first year laboratory
and assisted Dr. Blake in setting up lecture and
listened to his lectures so that I would be able to
help him when he wanted a demonstration. And I want
to say that Dr. Blake was 25 years ahead of his time.
He was one of the best educated men in chemistry in
this country at that time. and his assistant was
equally good, a fellow by the name of McDougal,
F.H. McDougal.
He taught the chemical engineers. Blake was
overseer and taught mostly the first year men. Dr.
Frapps taught agricultural chemistry. Blake
taught organic chemistry and general chemistry.
Nelson was analytical chemistry for the chemical
engineers.
I could have said I got a raise to $720 for the next
year. That
thing went
on up. for the year 1915-16, I had 1440, and they had
jumped, that jumped me $200, and those
got a jump of $400.
Well, at that time, as I said, I was no longer the
bottom man on the totem pole, but I still was
carrying an awful lot of Nelson's work as well as
some of the other. And when I learned that Nelson
got a $400 raise and I only got a $200 raise, I blew my
stack.
And at that time, Dr. Hedges was in charge of the
department. I told him that I was going to get
$1,580 or $1,640,
and he could make up his mind which it would be. He
went over to see Brassell, the president, and he
came back and said, Dr. Brassell just says there
isn't that much money. He can't let you have it. I
said, I figured he'd do that. Here's my letter of
resignation. He said, you can't quit. I said, I
have. I said, I'll leave here the first day of
November.
And about 30 minutes later, Dr. Brazell called up
and told me to come over. He wanted to see me. He told
me that he had just found some monies he didn't know
he had. And that I was going to get $1,620, I guess it
was. Delce was getting $1,660. Does that work out
right? Whether it works out right or not,
something like that. He just put me in as his
segundo. I see. Okay. And did you have any second
thoughts about coming back to this place? No,
because at the close of the war,
I had made up my mind that I wasn't going to stay in
the country where the snow that fell on the first
day of December was still on the ground for the 15th
day of April. Where is the Picatinny Arsenal?
Northern part of Dover, New Jersey. Cold country.
A thousand feet above New York City. And we'd be
having snow and ice and New York would be fairly
warm.
So then you came back here at the close of the war
then? Mm-hmm. I see. and is what, number two man in
chemistry school? Professor of industrial
chemistry in charge of the work in chemical
engineering. I see. I held that job until 1935 when
the depression
soured me on the whole thing and I went into the
extension service and worked within agriculture
from then until 1957. What soured you? On Kemet,
you said you got soured on the whole thing. Were you
talking about the school? No, no. I got soured
here. We spent four years trying to develop young
men that
take that place and the industry and society.
And when they graduated, there was no place for
them. I had boys by Jimenez in 32 and 33 go to work for
$25 a month. And one boy went to, came to me and said,
how much I was out of yet? I said, a hundred and a
quarter. But he said, so-and-so offered me 50. I
said, did you take it? He said, yes. I said, good.
Some of the boys went near me. That's where
Al Ludeke and Cepha,
No, there were three or four of them. I alluded to
this one. They all came out as Major Generals. I
came to think, I was trying to say CIFR, but it
wasn't CIFR. It was something like that. CIFR in
that period. They went down and every one of them
came out as Major Generals. Top of their hands. No
place for them. Well, could you tell us a little bit
about the depression here at the school? How did it
affect the school or the students, other than not
being jobless when they got out? No, man.
They just more or less, I would say that everybody
more or less accepted it. in a fatalistic sort of a
way. Was the school adversely affected? Was it
badly affected? No, because we scratched and made
do and kept on going. Then it wasn't probably maybe
as bad here as it was in other parts of the country
then? Probably not. In other words, we didn't have
the money. The legislature cut our monies out.
Didn't cut them out, but reduced them. And all we
did was just pull up our belts
and drive by. Did the school ever have any trouble
paying you? What? Did the school ever have any
trouble making its payments to the faculty? They
always got you checks. Yes, but that wasn't the
school. That was the state.
The
banks in Brown tried to carry those certificates
without discounting them, but they couldn't make
it eternally, and finally they had to start
discounting them. Yes, they had that. In a way,
they paid you in a kind of a script then. Yes, a
script. And if the bank discounted them, then you
all lost money on what you were being, the little
bit you were being paid anyway. So the state was
actually not paying in cash then? Oh, no. The
outcome of it is we got a law passed. If you have read
the papers about the way the legislature
functions, we can't do that. We won't have the
cash. We're on a cash-as-we-go basis in the state.
And if the cash isn't going to be there, that
appropriation will not be made. And that's the
root out of that condition. Texas A&M wasn't the
only one that was affected. Every institution,
every college, every state institution had the
same thing. I see. It wasn't picked on A&M. Did the
state ever pay off on that script? Oh, yes. They
picked it all up. How long did they pay you in that?
Do you remember? No, I don't. What was it, a year or
six months? I really don't know. I'd say at least a
year, but I really don't know. I can't. Do you
remember, you don't have any idea what year this
was they were doing this? No, about 32, 33,
somewhere in there. I see. Did, was there more,
were there fewer or less students coming to
school? There were fewer. They didn't have money
enough. Of course, what boys came, A lot of them had
to work. I could get a boy to push a lawnmower over my
lawn for two bucks. In other words, the labor pay
scales were almost non-existent.
Is there anything before we go on past the end to
the, you said you went to work for the Extension or
Experiment Station? Extension. The Extension
Service. Is there anything about that previous to
that time you'd like to comment on, any
experiences, any people you'd like to talk about
that are possibly any of the presidents that I have
listed here that maybe you had experiences with?
Well, as I said, it's rather interesting. When I
came here, Harrington had been president. They
had a strike, and after some of those students'
strike, he was benched. He was a director of the
experiment station and raised to the president.
Well, let's see what that is.
Here in 1905.
And
when I came, he had been set down as a result of that
strike and given his job as the director of the
Experiment Station again.
And of course, I knew him. Believe it or not, he was
reared in Starkville, Mississippi. And I knew him
and his folks when I came here. So he was
rather courtly sort of a fellow and very definite
in his opinions. It's one of the things that caused
him his trouble. A man in that position as
president can't be too definite in his opinions.
But if he is, he don't want people to think it. But so
I accept the fact that he was a very affable man. I
liked him. That's about as far as I could go. But
Milner came here. He came here before I did. He came
in 1908. I came in 1911, February of 11. One of the
first men I met on the campus after I got through the
official thing with Blake and his crew and the
bunch down at the Shirley was I ran into him on the
campus, and he stopped and talked to me. Of course,
in that day and time, You knew everyone on the
campus.
And he stopped and talked to me, and I was pretty
well impressed with it. And the more longer I knew
him, the more impressed I was with him. Now, he was
not a scholar,
but he brought in to the policy of the institution
a statement that still rides with you, and that is
that no boy who earnestly wants an education will
be turned away. And it's still that way. The
administrative bunch would go out of their way to
help a boy today that is earnestly wanting an
education. And it didn't help. A boy failed a
course, well, he's not doing any good. Kick him out
of college. Oh, no, not with Milner.
Let him take it over next year. But you know, Milner
would not tolerate
a moving school of students from the institution
for scholastic inefficiencies. He just wouldn't
stand it. And
they had a strike down here in 1912,
I guess it was,
and it broke his heart.
and he retired saying that if he had no more
influence over the boys then that he wouldn't stay
here and he left with that with a you might say a
broken heart. Do you have any idea what the strike
was about? Hazing. Hazing and he tried to stop it.
He not only tried to stop it but he tried to to work
around it so that there'd be no trouble. He tried to
compromise all the way through so that everybody
would be happy, but it wasn't to be. How about after
that? Do you remember? Charles Periot went in as
acting president, and he's a rather interesting
little fellow. He was originally a professor of
mathematics, and I think he still taught at this
time.
He actually ran the institution's scholastic
work. And if you had any objection, there's one
thing that stands. Put it in writing. Any
proposition you had that involved the
institution that you dealt with Perea, you
submitted it in writing. You wouldn't consider it
otherwise.
But somewhere down in the mix up here, while he
was...
Milner was here, the Nassau band. 1912, I believe.
And there was a building, the Presence Visa Hall.
And they had some tin shacks
over there that they were eating in.
And the students, every Friday, every Saturday
night, but have a bass in the mess hall.
And it is quite a bass. You would have enjoyed it
yourself.
And I was sitting next to Pereira one night, and he
had
an election for the presidency of the college.
Cesar Horn was
acting chairman, I believe. I'm not too sure
whether he or Ray Dixon was acting chairman.
And Red Wayne Palmer, he's a student now.
Faribault Kincheloe.
And a couple more. was nominated for president of
the institution.
I was trying to think of one of them that was a
half-wit. I wouldn't mention his name, so I better
let it ride, because of the fact that his people
were pretty famous in the state.
And the speeches that bunch made, Perea said, oh,
he didn't like to rupture himself laughing.
But... That's about all the entertainment we had
was some fool thing like that.